Wound healing: an overview of acute, fibrotic, and delayed healing
https://www.bioscience.org/2004/v9/af/1184/2.htm
"The normal healing response begins the moment the tissue is injured. As the blood components spill into the site of injury, the platelets come into contact with exposed collagen and other elements of the extracellular matrix. This contact triggers the platelets to release clotting factors as well as essential growth factors and cytokines such as platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) and transforming growth factor beta (TGF-ß). Following hemostasis, the neutrophils then enter the wound site and begin the critical task of phagocytosis to remove foreign materials, bacteria and damaged tissue. As part of this inflammatory phase, the macrophages appear and continue the process of phagocytosis as well as releasing more PDGF and TGFß. Once the wound site is cleaned out, fibroblasts migrate in to begin the proliferative phase and deposit new extracellular matrix. The new collagen matrix then becomes cross-linked and organized during the final remodeling phase. In order for this efficient and highly controlled repair process to take place, there are numerous cell-signaling events that are required."
"The human body can sustain a variety of injuries, including penetrating trauma, burn trauma and blunt trauma. All of these insults set into motion an orderly sequence of events that are involved in the healing response, characterized by the movement of specialized cells into the wound site. Platelets and inflammatory cells are the first cells to arrive at the site of injury and they provide key functions and "signals" needed for the influx of connective tissue cells and a new blood supply. These chemical signals are known as cytokines or growth factors (1).
The fibroblast is the connective tissue cell responsible for collagen deposition that is needed to repair the tissue injury (2). Collagen is the most abundant protein in the animal kingdom, accounting for 30% of the total protein in the human body (3). In normal tissues collagen provides strength, integrity and structure. When tissues are disrupted following injury, collagen is needed to repair the defect and restore anatomic structure and function. If too much collagen is deposited in the wound site, normal anatomical structure is lost, function is compromised and fibrosis occurs. Conversely, if an insufficient amount of collagen is deposited, the wound is weak and may dehisce (4)."
